feat(blog): add gatsby is great blog post (#12777)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2019-03-25-behind-the-scenes-what-makes-gatsby-great/index.md

---
title: "Behind the Scenes: What makes Gatsby Great"
date: 2019-03-25
author: Dustin Schau

> excerpt: "Gatsby is fast. You know this. This post outlines the numerous performance techniques that Gatsby performs behind the scenes to deliver a ludicriously fast experience that your users will love."

Reviewer: What if they don't already know it's fast?

tags:
  - performance
  - apis
  - webpagetest
  - lighthouse
  - ci
---

Gatsby is **great** from a multititude of perspectives. Our community is **great**. The developer experience is **great**. The performance of the resulting application is **great**. Our documentation is **great**. And so on and so forth... if I were to focus on _each_ of these areas, this post would become an overly long love letter that I'm not sure many would want to read.

As such--this post focuses on just a single element of what makes Gatsby great: performance. To prime the discussion, let's consider this post on the `webdev` subreddit on Reddit.

<pullquote citation="reddit/r/webdev">
Genuine question, every page is loaded immediatley [sic] on click. Seriously never seen such a quick website before. Any insight as to how they're able to achieve this?
</pullquote>

> Fun fact--that website in question is [reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org) which is, as you may or may not know, is an application built with and powered by Gatsby 💪

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fun fact--that website in question is [reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org) which, as you may or may not know, is an application built with and powered by Gatsby 💪
```

<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

To begin describing why build-time SSR is so appealing, let's first take a look at what a deploy and release looks like if we don't require a server. What's required for a typical set-up for deploying static content (which Gatsby produces)? It looks something like:

- Creating a [Content Delivery Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CDN) to route your content _as close as possible_ to where your users are requesting it
  - This is often called "on the edge" and Gatsby can and should be deployed on the edge--[it reduces latency and improves page-load times](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/edge-server/)
- Creating a bucket/location to host static content (like S3, Google Cloud Storage, etc.)

> - Setting up a [Domain Name System (DNS)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_domain_name) to make your content routable via a pretty URL, e.g. gatsbyjs.org

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Setting up a [Domain Name System (DNS)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_domain_name) to make your content reachable via a pretty URL, e.g. gatsbyjs.org
```
Does `reachable` still work here? It's a somewhat technical term, and it's used again in the next line to describe the CDN layer.

Author: Yeah - definitely! Meaning is the same to me--so if we can use a less technical term, happy to do so!

We now have an infrastructure setup so that we _can_ release our web application. What's a release look like?

```shell
gatsby build
```

and then copying the result of `gatsby build` (the `public` folder) to your static content host of choice.

That's it. What if your site goes viral and receives hundreds of thousands of requests? You get charged in **terrabytes** of data with most CDNs, and that cost is quite literally [pennies](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/pricing/). Deploying a new version of your app? Fire off a deploy and your users will have the new version available the instant the build process completes.

Let's contrast this approach with setting up and deploying a purely server-side rendered application.

#### Deploying a server-side rendered application

First: perform the **same** steps in setting up a static content host, excluding the step for configuring a bucket/location for hosting static content. Oh and we're not done yet, sweet, sweet summer child.

> ![Sweet, Sweet Summer Child](https://media1.tenor.com/images/0ae8734d4f4184e8ac3d9f6032d0047f/tenor.gif?itemid=5580217)

Reviewer: 😂

Next:

- Set up and provision several [virtual machines (VM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine) to run instance(s) of our server-side app
  - Traditional examples are something like [EC2](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/)
- Configure the VM to be able to run Node.js code
  - Consider using [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) to ensure you have a consistent Node.js environment
- Set up auto-scaling to ensure we can accomodate and fall-over based upon heavy load or error states
  - Consider using [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), [Rancher](https://rancher.com/), etc.
- Set up a Continuous Integration (CI) environment so we can build and deploy code to production with minimal impact to end-users

> Does this sound like something that ✨joy? Oh--let's talk about the deploy process, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Does this sound like something that sparks joy? ✨Oh--let's talk about the deploy process, too.
```
Moving the emoji to the end of the sentence so we don't rely on it for the sentence to read well.

We use code-splitting (enabled via our internalized dependency [Webpack](https://webpackjs.org)), and in particular, our approach prioritizes app-level dependencies (libraries used by the majority or all routes) coupled with route-based code splitting for dependencies that are likely only used on a particular route. To more fully understand this, let's take a look at a sample structure produced by our build process: `gatsby build`.

```title=public/
├── 404
│   └── index.html
├── 9-f5d9c17474395c2890a3.js # highlight-line
├── about
│   └── index.html
├── app-2abedacd9bf03aaca373.js # highlight-line
├── component---src-pages-404-js-295c3d4f21322761edff.js
├── component---src-pages-about-js-3997b0d76203b183f5b3.js
├── component---src-pages-contact-js-34c976efa1482a119a50.js
├── component---src-pages-index-js-764f0d722c982d3d2789.js
├── contact
│   └── index.html # highlight-line
└── index.html

> ```

Reviewer 2: Missing here this from `index.html` below:

```
/static/d/686/path---contact-26-a-cd9-NZuapzHg3X9TaN1iIixfv1W23E.json
```

Author: It's intentionally simplified--but thank you!

Do you think it's confusing if I omit this? (as I have done here)

Reviewer 2: oh yes - i read the html snipped, remembered there was no json, and then looked for this file and did not find it. to be complete it would be nice to have and we see also where the static files are located.

Reviewer 2: mayby add also an `[... and presized images also]`

Let's take a deeper look at some of those JavaScript files.

### `app.{unique-hash}.js`

`app-2abedacd9bf03aaca373.js` in the above example is our commons bundle. It contains the shared dependencies for all routes. This can be cached between routes, so that JavaScript libraries like:

- `react`
- `react-dom`
- `@reach/router`
- `react-helmet`

are bundled on _every_ route because they are used on _every_ route.

### `{0-9}-{unique-hash}.js`

`9-f5d9c17474395c2890a3.js` in the above example is our route-based code splitting, in action. This will contain the separate dependencies that are required by our `/contact` route, specifically `Formik`, `yup`, etc. based on the previous example. This means that each route is only downloading the necessary JavaScript to make the page functional. No more and no less.

Consider the output of [`webpack-bundle-analyzer`](https://github.com/webpack-contrib/webpack-bundle-analyzer), which makes this even clearer.

![Webpack Bundle Analyzer](./images/bundle-analyzer.png)

> ### `component-{route-name}-{unique-hash}.js`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `component---{route-name}-{unique-hash}.js
```

> ### `component---{route-name}-{unique-hash}.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `component---{route-name}-{unique-hash}.js`
```

```js
// Skip prefetching if we know user is on slow or constrained connection
if (`connection` in navigator) {
  if ((navigator.connection.effectiveType || ``).includes(`2g`)) {
    return false
  }
  if (navigator.connection.saveData) {
    return false
  }
}
```

See the [code implementing this functionality here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/be023447eb0f5bd4612a447098fc85c7afdf0cdf/packages/gatsby/cache-dir/loader.js#L227-L235).

### `srcset` powering Responsive Images

Whew. It's been quite a ride. Finally, I'd like to discuss one of my favorite Gatsby components, specifically [`gatsby-image`](/packages/gatsby-image/). This component _also_ registers an `IntersectionObserver`, and uses it in an interesting, performance-focused manner. Let's get to it.

#### `gatsby-image`

> There are far, far, far too many otherwise decently performing websites that load a gargantuan 5Mb image request as a hero image. But--thankfully, this isn't you! You use `gatsby-image` and you get all of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are far, far, far too many otherwise decently performing websites that load a gargantuan 5Mb image request as a hero image. But--thankfully, this isn't you if you're using `gatsby-image`. With it you get all of the following:
```

- Responsive, optimized images using a `srcset`
  - A [`picture`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/picture) element with a `source srcset` is used
  - This means that using several media queries, you load the smallest image that matches your device (e.g. mobile devices get smaller images, desktop devices get larger images, etc.)
  - We even generate 2x and 3x DPi images for beautiful images, regardless of the screen quality!
- A base64 blurred image loaded by default
  - This has two wins: 1) Larger images outside the viewport are not requested until they're needed, and 2) The blurred image is in a container with the same dimensions as the real image--therefore, no jumping when the image loads!
  - Also see: [traced SVGs for a super slick alternative](/packages/gatsby-plugin-sharp/#tracedsvg)
- An `IntersectionObserver` that swaps the base image for the larger image, when the image is in the viewport

>   - See [the code here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/7684b4f0126724521967f7c8d31d32ec8d9b5fa6/packages/gatsby-image/src/index.js#L45-L69)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - See the [image IntersectionObserver code here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/7684b4f0126724521967f7c8d31d32ec8d9b5fa6/packages/gatsby-image/src/index.js#L45-L69)
```
This might be a little long and/or repetitive...but we should write descriptive links whenever possible. Maybe there's something better?

And one of the best wins of all--Gatsby's pluggable ecosystem and GraphQL data layer are both used to produce and pass the optimized images directly to this component. It looks something like:

```jsx:title=src/components/hero.js
import React from "react"
import { graphql, useStaticQuery } from "gatsby"
import Image from "gatsby-image"

export default function AnActuallyGoodAndResponsiveHeroImage() {
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
    file(relativePath: { eq: "some-hero-image.jpg" }) {
      childImageSharp {
        fluid(maxWidth: 1200) {
          ...GatsbyImageSharpFluid
        }
      }
    }
  `)

>   return <Image fluid={data.file.childImageSharp.fluid} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return <Image fluid={data.file.childImageSharp.fluid} alt="" />
```

      <img src="/static/3be68/your-great-image.jpg" alt=""style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;transition:opacity 0.5s;transition-delay:0.5s;opacity:1;width:100%;height:100%;object-fit:cover;object-position:center"/>
    </picture>
  </noscript>
</div>
```

For a demo of all you can do with `gatsby-image`, check out the example [Using Gatsby Image](https://using-gatsby-image.gatsbyjs.org).

The power and appeal of Gatsby is that we internalize all of these great APIs, performance techniques, and patterns. Enabling these (and improving with incremental releases of Gatsby!) allow you to focus on what matters: delivering compelling and engaging user experiences backed by your friendly, fast, and powerful web compiler: Gatsby.

It's been quite a ride 😅 By this point, we've covered the foundational techniques Gatsby uses to deliver a performance optimized application for your end users. However--to assert something is fast, you need to measure it. You need analytics, tools, and checks to assert that not only is your app fast but also just as important that it _remains_ fast.

## Techniques for measuring performance

> With any application, even one with a rock-solid performance basis like Gatsby, the advice I'd give is to trust, but validate. It's _unlikely_ you'll introduce a significant performance regression with a new feature and pull request, but even the best of foundations can be torn down. "I think I'll load _six_ fonts each in weights 100-900" he said and "Oh, and I think two feedback libraries _and_ a few analytics libraries are really going to drive conversion and put us over the edge," said someone, assuredly, at some point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With any application, even one with a rock-solid performance basis like Gatsby, the advice I'd give is to trust, but validate. It's _unlikely_ you'll introduce a significant performance regression with a new feature and pull request, but even the best of foundations can be torn down. "I think I'll load _six_ fonts each in weights 100-900", they said, and "Oh, and I think two feedback libraries _and_ a few analytics libraries are really going to drive conversion and put us over the edge," said someone, assuredly, at some point.
```

### Lighthouse

> The quickest and easiest recommendation for measuring performance is to first and foremost use the tools available to you. Chrome has an excellent tool built-in, [Lighthouse](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse) accessible via the "Audits" tab in Developer Tools (and fun fact--Gatsby's very own [Ward Peeters](https://github.com/wardpeet) is a core contributor!).

Reviewer: I've also been a core contributor to the underlying accessibility API where issues are sometimes filed, not sure if that's worth mentioning :)

Author: Of course it is!! Thanks for letting me know--will add you 👍

Author: Did add you! This OK?

> and fun fact--Gatsby's very own [Ward Peeters](https://github.com/wardpeet) and [Marcy Sutton](https://twitter.com/marcysutton) are core contributors!

> Lighthouse is accessible via the developer tools in Chrome: `F12` -> `Audits` and then `Run audit`. You'll be greated with a result like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lighthouse is accessible via the developer tools in Chrome: `F12` -> `Audits` and then `Run audit`. You'll be greeted with a result like:
```

![Lighthouse Example](./images/lighthouse.png)

> Lighthouse will provide scores from 0 - 100 for a variety of meaningful categories, including p :erformance, accessibility, and more. Actionable feedback is provided if the score is less than 100, so you can feel empowered to make improvements and maximize those 💯s!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lighthouse will provide scores from 0 - 100 for a variety of meaningful categories, including performance, accessibility, and more. Actionable feedback is provided if the score is less than 100, so you can feel empowered to make improvements and maximize those 💯s!
```

Lighthouse is a great _first_ step to asserting whether or not your application is actually fast. If you are scoring near 100s (if you're using Gatsby--you probably are!) you can feel assured with a reasonable degree of confidence that your application is actually fast. However--Lighthouse can sometimes vary between runs and results can sometimes vary depending on which machine is used to run the test. To gain a greater degree of _certainty_ that your application is fast I recommend another, complementary tool: Webpagetest.

### Webpagetest

> [Webpagetest](https://webpagetest.org) is an amazing tool built by [Patrick Meenan](https://twitter.com/patmeenan). You can tweak the device used in the tests to validate that your application works even on low-performing devices that tend to be CPU constrained. You can use a slower network to ensure that you get a accurate representation of how your users could be interacting with your application in less-than-ideal network connections. You can even choose the location of where your test is run!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Webpagetest](https://webpagetest.org) is an amazing tool built by [Patrick Meenan](https://twitter.com/patmeenan). You can tweak the device used in the tests to validate that your application works even on low-performing devices that tend to be CPU-constrained. You can use a slower network to ensure that you get an accurate representation of how your users could be interacting with your application in less-than-ideal network connections. You can even choose the location of where your test is run!
```
